# Differential Geometry: an autistic introduction


These notes started when I, along with my friend Umang Mehta, taught a series of seminars to our fellow physics grad students at UChicago in 2018/19. My desire to do so was based, in part, on the fact that another friend of mine, Sam Pramodh, taught me many of these topics in a similar fashion two years earlier.

In 2024 these notes started getting greatly expanded as part of my effort to continue deepening my understanding of these subjects, as well as to continue teaching my friends. The subtitle *"an autistic introduction"* refers to the only style of teaching that I find fully satisfying: *bottom up*. In short, this means that I try to apply the following principle:

**no sophisticated construction is introduced until it is motivated enough to feel necessary**

Teaching in this way inherently forces one to understand the objects being introduced much deeper, always keeping one's eyes on the ultimate goal. 

For example, general fiber bundles are commonly introduced very briefly on the way to defining vector bundles because in the simplest applications all one needs are tensor bundles. Only then, depending on where one wants to branch out, other types of bundles are introduced, such as principal bundles, group bundles, sphere bundles, etc. This causes tremedous difficulties for first-time learners of the subject because each new type of bundle requires ``unlearning'' a number of common facts that were true about the last type of bundle. If one trains their imagination on vector bundles, then hearing about a bundle with no global section suddenly becomes very confusing. Another underexplained difference is that principal bundles have a global action of the structure group, whereas vector bundles do not. 

This is why, even though most of the material in these notes is copied from external sources, it is heavily refactored and synthesized to provide a bottom up narrative that, to a maximum reasonable extent, moves from general to specific, adding new structure only when it becomes necessary. The "prize" on which we keep our eyes in this entire process is the classification of fiber bundles, which eventually forces us to learn about homology and cohomology, to which the entire next Part is dedicated. Here is what this approach implies for the above example of fiber bundles:
1. Fiber bundles are motivated as a special type of submersion for which all fibers are diffeomorphic. Without this property, all we get are topological fibrations, which are a kind of topological surjective submersion for which the homotopy lifting property holds. This is why we first dive into topology and homotopy theory before moving onto fiber bundles. The natural progression from submersions to quotient maps to fiber bundles is mirrored on the injective side by immersions, injective immersions, and embeddings. This classification can be found at the end of Section 3.10. A big part of the topological background is the section on covering spaces, which becomes a prototype for many of the phenomena in fiber bundles, including connections and characteristic classes.
2. Thus we arrive at the definition of fiber bundle with a large baggage of knowledge and expectations related to various lifting properties. The exploration of the definition of a fiber bundle immediately leads one to Lie group valued transition functions. Therefore, before we even start talking about fiber bundles, a whole section is dedicated to a basic introduction into Lie groups and algebras right up to the point where the tangent bundle is needed. hHis includes an advanced section on infinite-dimensional Lie groups.
3. Group-valued transition functions on a fiber bundle naturally take values in the infinite-dimensional diffeomorphism group of the typical fiber. In practice, and in specific examples, this group can be easily ``reduced'' to a finite-dimensional Lie group, which is actually necessary for any realistic computations. This concept naturally leads to the definition of G-structures as a choice of a maximal G-valued atlas on a bundle. This definition is effectively absent from the literature (despite being well understoof by mathematicians), so there is a lot of my own work in laying it out. Through an extensive list of examples we see how a proper choice of a G-structure allows one to *derive* the definitions of a vector bundle, an oriented bundle, a Riemannian bundle, group bundles, etc. Therefore this way of approaching fiber bundles gives a unifying view of all existing types of bundles.
4. In particular, we notice that the categories of bundles with a fixed typical fiber (and action of the fixed structure group on them) are actually independent (up to equivalence) of the specific fiber and group action. This means that, for the purpose of studying general structures on bundles and classifying them, we are free to choose one special class of typical fibers on which computations are particularly simple. This eventually motivates the idea of principal bundles. But first we specialize to vector bundles and study them in detail, including a basic intro to K-theory, which is the first example of an (extraordinary) cohomology theory.
5. Before we can get to principal bundles, however, we need a lot of general theory of Lie groups and group actions on manifolds. For this purpose, three sections are devoted to studying the tangent bundle of a Lie group, the analytic structure of Lie groups (notably the Closed Subgroup Theorem and Yamabe's Theorem), and group actions on manifolds (including homogeneous spaces and free proper actions). All of this is done without any unnecessary restrictions to smaller classes of Lie groups such as compact groups or matrix groups. In fact, as we show, some Lie groups have no faithful finite-dimensional representations, which means that the theory of matrix groups is inadequate for studying many relevant groups such as spin groups.
6. Free and proper Lie group actions are a very natural object to consider because at that point we will have already seen that proper submersions generate fiber bundles (Ehresmann's Fibration Theorem). We discover that a manifold with a free and proper group action carries a natural structure of a fiber bundle, and this becomes the first definition of principal fiber bundles.
7. Having defined principal bundles purely geometrically, we can take a step back and study their local trivializations and derive the more conventional definition. Then we naturally land on associated bundles defined via the association functor (which is an equivalence of categories as explained above), which finally gives an atlas-free definition of *all* fiber bundles. Next it is natural to look at bundle reductions and identify them with the first definition of G-structures. This coming full circle effectively means that the discussion of fiber bundles was rounded up in a proper pedagogical fashion.
8. Having explored general fiber bundles in sufficient depth, it is then time to start adding more structure. To motivate this structure, it is instructive to first look at Klein geometries, which are a classic kind of ``homogeneous''  principal bundles. In a way, their geometry is a natural extension of the geometry of Lie groups, exemplified by the presence of the Maurer-Cartan form. Principal bundles (and more generally bundle reductions) can be seen as bundles of Klein geometries, so the natural question is what is the analog of a Maurer-Cartan form on principal bundles.
9. This question leads us to the next fundamental structure since fiber bundles themselves: connections. Connections are nothing but a tool for quantifying the Frobenius integrability criterion (that a distribution is integrable iff it is involutive). On fiber bundles, connections also give rise to the notion of parallel transport, which is an alternative definition of a connection. The magical fact that makes connections so extraordinarily useful is that they are essentially tensorial objects which one can use to compute topological invariants of the underlying bundle. This leads us to the discussion of holonomy and its relation to bundle reductions. Finally, this motivates the future study of characteristic classes as those very topological invariants expressed in tensorial terms.
10. From here, we launch into an exploration of the different ways of defining connections, how they are related to each other, etc. Loyal to the bottom up approach, we avoid talking about connections on vector bundles for as long as possible so as to not generate false memes of what is required for various constructions. Finally, before getting into particular types of connections and G-structures (Riemannian, complex, symplectic, Khäler), we cover the language that unifies all of them -- that of Cartan geometry. This is another classic topic that became depressingly esoteric over time, and yet is key to understanding many fundamental phenomena in differential geometry. For example, the Newlander-Niremberg criterion for the integrability of an almost complex structure is properly understood as a condition on the vanishing of the intrinsic torsion of the corresponding GL(n,C)-structure.

Evidently, this is a very circuitous way of learning about geometry if one's goal is, say, merely Riemannian geometry. However, if one's goal is to understand differential geometry as a whole (which I would argue is very important to theoretical physicists), then the bottom up approach is the only effective one. Of course, teaching an actual course this way is unrealistic simply because it would take multiple years to finish. However, I still believe in the power of open knowledge. For the same reason, and also since I'm sure there are many typos still remaining, the TeX code is published here alongside the PDF.